Blog for Rust 1.50.0 (#771)
rust-lang/blog.rust-lang.org: posts/2021-02-11-Rust-1.50.0.md

---
layout: post
title: "Announcing Rust 1.50.0"
author: The Rust Release Team
release: true
---

The Rust team is happy to announce a new version of Rust, 1.50.0. Rust is a
programming language that is empowering everyone to build reliable and
efficient software.

If you have a previous version of Rust installed via rustup, getting Rust
1.50.0 is as easy as:

```console
rustup update stable
```

If you don't have it already, you can [get `rustup`][install]
from the appropriate page on our website, and check out the
[detailed release notes for 1.50.0][notes] on GitHub.

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-1500-2021-02-11

## What's in 1.50.0 stable

> For this release, we have improved array indexing, expanded union field safety, refined file descriptors, and new library additions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For this release, we have improved array indexing, expanded union field safety, refined file descriptors, and ? new library additions.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe?

```suggestion
For this release, we have improved array indexing, expanded union field safety, refined file descriptors, and added to the standard library.
```

Author: I guess I was thinking "we have ... new library additions", but that doesn't agree with verb tense of the others. I like @camelid's suggestion.

> For this release, we have improved array indexing, expanded union field safety, refined file descriptors, and added to the standard library.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For this release, we have improved array indexing, expanded safe access to union fields, and added to the standard library.
```

* Not sure why, but "expanded union field safety" was not quite making sense to me - maybe this looks better?
* I don't thinking refining file descriptors parses for me, seems easier to cut it.

See the [detailed release notes][notes] to learn about other changes
not covered by this post.

### Const-generic array indexing

Continuing the march toward stable `const` generics, this release adds
implementations of `ops::Index` and `IndexMut` for arrays `[T; N]` for
_any_ length of `const N`. The indexing operator `[]` already worked on
arrays through built-in compiler magic, but at the type level, arrays
didn't actually implement the library traits until now.

```rust
fn second<C>(container: &C) -> &C::Output
where
    C: std::ops::Index<usize> + ?Sized,
{
    &container[1]
}

fn main() {
    let array: [i32; 3] = [1, 2, 3];
    assert_eq!(second(&array[..]), &2); // slices worked before
    assert_eq!(second(&array), &2); // now it also works directly
}
```

### Safe assignments to `ManuallyDrop<T>` union fields

Rust 1.49 made it possible to add `ManuallyDrop<T>` fields to a `union`
as part of allowing `Drop` for unions at all; however, unions don't know
which variant is valid (they don't drop any old value on assignment), so
safe Rust has limited this to `Copy` types only, which never `Drop`. Of
course, that's also true of `ManuallyDrop`, so now Rust 1.50 allows safe

> assignments to these fields as well.

Reviewer 3: Can we split the first sentence of this paragraph up? I think it's carrying a lot of weight right now in a relatively short space and would be nice to add some breaks for readers.

Author: I split and rearranged this a bit.

### A niche for `File` on Unix platforms

> Some types in Rust have specific limitations on what is considered

Reviewer 2: You're missing "a":

```suggestion
Some types in Rust have specific limitations on what is considered a
```

> valid value, which may not cover the entire range of possible memory

Reviewer 3: Maybe worth linking to https://www.ralfj.de/blog/2019/07/14/uninit.html as well

Author: I think that's off-topic? Uninitialized memory is sort of an abstract fuzzy state, outside of merely "bit patterns that are invalid for this type" that we use for niches.

Reviewer 3: Yeah - I just see "entire range of memory values" and think of uninit immediately :)

values. We call any remaining invalid value a [niche], and this space
may be used for type layout optimizations. For example, in Rust 1.28

> we introduced `NonZero` types where `0` is a niche, and this allowed

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
we introduced `NonZero` integer types (like `NonZeroU8`) where `0` is a niche, and this allowed
```

`Option<NonZero>` to use `0` to represent `None` with no extra memory.

On Unix platforms, Rust's `File` is simply made of the system's integer
file descriptor, and this happens to have a possible niche
as well because it can never be `-1`! System calls which return a file
descriptor use `-1` to indicate that an error occurred (check `errno`)
so it's never possible for `-1` to be a real file descriptor. Starting

> in Rust 1.50 this niche is represented to the compiler so it can be

Reviewer 2: "represented" sounds a bit funny to me. However, I can't think of a better word to use ;)

Does someone have an idea of a better word? If not, it's probably fine as-is though.

Reviewer 4: how about "this niche is added to Rust's type system so it can be used in layout optimizations too"

Reviewer 2: IIUC, it's not that it's added to the type system – that implies it was hard-coded. It's more like it's *exposed* to the type system, so maybe this?

```suggestion
in Rust 1.50 information about this niche is exposed to the compiler so it can be
```

Reviewer 4: how about "this niche is added to the type's definition so it can be used in layout optimizations too"

Reviewer 4: since the niche didn't exist before

> use in layout optimizations too. It follows that `Option<File>` will

Reviewer: ```suggestion
used in layout optimizations too. It follows that `Option<File>` will
```

now have the same size as `File` itself!

[niche]: https://rust-lang.github.io/unsafe-code-guidelines/glossary.html#niche

### Library changes

In Rust 1.50.0, there are nine new stable functions:

- [`bool::then`]
- [`btree_map::Entry::or_insert_with_key`]
- [`f32::clamp`]
- [`f64::clamp`]
- [`hash_map::Entry::or_insert_with_key`]
- [`Ord::clamp`]
- [`RefCell::take`]

> - [`slice::fill`]

Reviewer 3: Hm, I am now wondering if this would be a better thing to call out than the File niche - it seems more likely to be notable to most users and is pretty nice as "safe Rust API" where the C ones is pretty annoying to use in a safe way.

Author: My muse fails me on this one. I agree `slice::fill` is a useful method, but even the documentation has only a terse sentence and short example. If you're feeling inspired, would you (or anyone else) care to try writing something for this?

Reviewer 5: > is pretty nice as "safe Rust API" where the C ones is pretty annoying to use in a safe way.

This is the same as `memset`, right? Why is this annoying in C? Memset takes the length of the buffer.

Reviewer 3: memset is also used to e.g. zero out arrays of structs, where it's finicky (IME) to get the length and such right in a guaranteed way. this API avoids those problems. but I don't feel strongly.

Reviewer 5: Ah right, because people tend to put `sizeof(T*)` instead of `sizeof(T)`. Ok, makes sense.

Reviewer 6: > Hm, I am now wondering if this would be a better thing to call out than the File niche

FWIW, I don't think it needs to be an either or situation, the blog post as it stands is about 600 words, adding one more paragraph isn't going to significantly increase the length. It takes roughly 3 minutes to read. I don't think I've ever seen someone complain about the blog post being too long, but I have seen people lament it being too short.

while that feature was unstable for arbitrary expressions, its implementation
since Rust 1.38 accidentally allowed stable use of `const` _values_ in array
repetition.

```rust
fn main() {
    // This is not allowed, because `Option<Vec<i32>>` does not implement `Copy`.
    let array: [Option<Vec<i32>>; 10] = [None; 10];

    const NONE: Option<Vec<i32>> = None;
    const EMPTY: Option<Vec<i32>> = Some(Vec::new());

    // However, repeating a `const` value is allowed!
    let nones = [NONE; 10];
    let empties = [EMPTY; 10];
}
```

In Rust 1.50, that stabilization is formally acknowledged. In the future, to avoid such "temporary" named
constants, you can look forward to inline `const` expressions per [RFC 2920].

[RFC 2203]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2203-const-repeat-expr.html
[RFC 2920]: https://rust-lang.github.io/rfcs/2920-inline-const.html

### Safe assignments to `ManuallyDrop<T>` union fields

Rust 1.49 made it possible to add `ManuallyDrop<T>` fields to a `union` as part
of allowing `Drop` for unions at all. However, unions don't drop old values
when a field is assigned, since they don't know which variant was formerly

> valid, so safe Rust has limited this to `Copy` types only, which never `Drop`.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
valid, so safe Rust previously limited this to `Copy` types only, which never `Drop`.
```

[install]: https://www.rust-lang.org/install.html
[notes]: https://github.com/rust-lang/rust/blob/master/RELEASES.md#version-1500-2021-02-11

## What's in 1.50.0 stable

For this release, we have improved array indexing, expanded safe access to union fields, and added to the standard library.
See the [detailed release notes][notes] to learn about other changes
not covered by this post.

### Const-generic array indexing

Continuing the march toward stable `const` generics, this release adds
implementations of `ops::Index` and `IndexMut` for arrays `[T; N]` for
_any_ length of `const N`. The indexing operator `[]` already worked on
arrays through built-in compiler magic, but at the type level, arrays
didn't actually implement the library traits until now.

```rust
fn second<C>(container: &C) -> &C::Output
where
    C: std::ops::Index<usize> + ?Sized,
{
    &container[1]
}

fn main() {
    let array: [i32; 3] = [1, 2, 3];
    assert_eq!(second(&array[..]), &2); // slices worked before
    assert_eq!(second(&array), &2); // now it also works directly
}
```

### `const` value repetition for arrays

Arrays in Rust can be written either as a list `[a, b, c]` or a repetition `[x; N]`.

> For lengths `N` greater than one, repetition has only been allowed for `Copy`
> types, and [RFC 2203] sought to allow any `const` expression there. However,

Reviewer 2: This is a little unclear about *what* needs to be `Copy`: is it `x` or `N`?

```suggestion
For lengths `N` greater than one, repetition has only been allowed for `x`s that are `Copy`,
and [RFC 2203] sought to allow any `const` expression there. However,
```

while that feature was unstable for arbitrary expressions, its implementation
since Rust 1.38 accidentally allowed stable use of `const` _values_ in array
repetition.

```rust
fn main() {
    // This is not allowed, because `Option<Vec<i32>>` does not implement `Copy`.
    let array: [Option<Vec<i32>>; 10] = [None; 10];

    const NONE: Option<Vec<i32>> = None;
    const EMPTY: Option<Vec<i32>> = Some(Vec::new());

    // However, repeating a `const` value is allowed!
    let nones = [NONE; 10];
    let empties = [EMPTY; 10];
}
```

In Rust 1.50, that stabilization is formally acknowledged, so you may use this

> construct without fear. In the future, to avoid such "temporary" named

Reviewer 3: Hm, I'd prefer to avoid this "without fear" language - I think it's unlikely we would have dropped support for such a long-term stabilized feature regardless, and it indicates some worry about backwards compatibility in my eyes.

> In Rust 1.50, that stabilization is formally acknowledged, so you may use this
> construct without fear. In the future, to avoid such "temporary" named

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
In Rust 1.50, that stabilization is formally acknowledged. In the future, to avoid such "temporary" named
```
